---
layout: post
title: "The death of a loved one and the temptation of religion"
date: 2012-12-27 12:51
comments: true
categories: [atheism, meaning of life]
---
I missed my mother's call at 10:18 a.m. I knew something went wrong for her to call at this time from the other side of the globe. I called her back immediately and could only hear her sobbing - "Zero is gone" she said. She could not be consoled.

Zero our dog was gone. He was a month and a half shy of his 11th birthday. I saw him last year after a gap of three long years. He still remembered me - he jumped and danced and licked me like he always did. Though he was 10 years old at that time (relatively old for a dog) - he was as playful and energetic as ever. He had grown white hair on his jet black face, but that did not hold him back. 6 months ago he started getting sick a lot more often. Most of his ailments were mild - he had warts everywhere and scratched and bit at them till they bled. We had a lot of them removed, none of them malignant. He started showing signs of growing old. He was as playful as ever but only in burts. He was still the first one to respond to a knock on our door. He would still play when he met some one - friend or stranger, but had to rest after a few minutes. Then just a week ago he contracted pneumonia - a sign of his failing immune system. He suffered for 5 days and the fittest dog that I have ever seen passed away. My mom had called us the previous day to tell me how she feared for his life. My sister and I scolded her - "He is on antibiotics and will get better. Pneumonia does not go away in a couple of days!" He was brave till the last moment - he tried getting up a few times, stumbled and then fell down, never to get up again.
<!-- more -->

Our reactions were typical - I wanted my mother to make sure that he was dead. Maybe, just maybe he was resting. My mother knew he was gone. We cried, taking turns to console each other - he was gone, he was really gone. I knew that the next time I visited home, my friend of 11 years would not be there to greet me. I wanted some one to be responsible for his death. Was it the doctors? They must have not diagnosed him well. If only he started on the antibiotics a bit earlier - he would have made it. I contemplated believing in a God, only so that I could blame him for taking Zero away. I blamed myself for not being with my mom, who was left alone to take care of him. I blamed myself for being too lazy to get tickets on time. I decided to stay back here in Mountain View instead of being with Zero and my mom in India.

I spent the whole day in a trance- alternating between smiling when I remembered his idiosyncrasies and how I would never see him again. I remembered how he would sit near me whenever I ate food at the table. He had a hopeful yet somehow proud look stance - it was impossible to not give him some of my food. I tried to resolve his death and suffering with my belief system. Why do living beings age? Why can we not just continue functioning. The same processes that renew us and heal us in our youth - fail us so miserably when we get old. The entropy of a closed system keeps increasing - I thought. That must be the reason. But living creatures are not a closed system! I read about the [evolution of ageing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution_of_ageing) - I wasn't satisfied. Why do some creatures have [negligible senescence?](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negligible_senescence)

Zero was buried in a grave the next day. I cried and wondered what would happen to his consciousness. I read even more. I read about the [mind-body dichotomy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mind-body_problem) and about eternal oblivion. My fervent, almost religious belief was in eternal oblivion. Consciousness was a construct of the brain and when the brain dies so does one's consciousness. But I wasn't prepared to accept that Zero was going to dissolve in the mud. Surely he had to exist somewhere - somewhere where he was happy. The thought that each of us will die one day is sad enough, but the thought that our loved ones will disappear forever is outright paralyzing. I was tempted - tempted by my love for my friend, tempted by the sadness our our separation. I understood why religion presented such a powerful hope. The invisible, loving man judging our actions with rather arbitrary rules was not tempting enough, even the feeling of purpose was not tempting enough - the simple but rather satisfying idea that we and our loved ones will not just fade away was the biggest temptation of religion.

As I wrestled with my thoughts I realized that the loss of Zero was too much for me - I cannot go through it again. I feel guilty admitting that the joy he brought us throughout his life was not worth the sadness of his end. I saw him come to our home as a feeble 2 month puppy and had to witness his demise. I do not know where Zero is now. All I know is that my loving companion, my faithful friend, my innocent child of 11 years has gone and with him he has taken 11 years of my life.